---
name: Joseph Luna
image: images/people/joe.jpg
role: pi
description: Principal Investigator
aliases:
  - Joe Luna
  - J. Luna
  - JL
links:
  orcid: 0000-0003-2415-9203
  github: josephmluna
---

Hi! I'm an Assistant Professor at the Department of Biochemistry and Center for RNA Science and Therapeutics at CWRU, in Cleveland Ohio. My research currently focuses on how RNA virus genomes interact with host proteins for replication and how cells sense invading viral genomes to initiate immune responses. It's really fun work! Lab websites usually have a formal biography listing degrees and achievements. But science is more than that - it's a journey shaped by curiosity, chance, and the people we meet along the way. So here's a full, n=1 scientific biography.

My journey in science started in El Paso, Texas (my hometown), in a movie theater of all places. I was 9 years old watching Jurassic Park, and was captivated how tiny bits of stuff called DNA could be used to engineer a dinosaur. A real lab experience would have to wait until college. Until then, I kept busy with things that captured my curiosity: building model rockets, learning auto repair, and devouring history books. I went to Yale as a first-generation college student, where I earned my B.S. in Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry in 2006. It was here that I first picked up a pipette in my first lab experience with Thomas Biederer in the summer at the end of my sophomore year. In the Biederer lab I worked on staining for interaction proteins for a molecule called SynCAM, which had been shown to stimulate synapse formation between neurons - essentially helping brain cells form their essential connections. My burgenoing interest in cell biology fused with virology during a Postbaccalaureate Research Education Program (PREP) fellowship under Walther Mothes, also at Yale, studying anti-retroviral restriction factors. I got my first glimpse of what it meant to conduct a screen here, and I learned a ton from Dr. Pradeep Uchil, my postdoc mentor, as he screened TRIM proteins for their ability to restrict either viral entry or egress, using murine leukemia virus as a main model.

From there, and with plenty of encouragement from the late Dr. Brett Lindenbach, who had just started his lab next door to the Mothes lab, I made the decision to go to grad school at the Rockefeller University in NYC. I knew I wanted to dive deeper into viruses and cell biology, but the particulars were more than up for grabs. I was looking for an adventure and pretty soon I found one. In my second rotation in Robert Darnell's lab, I learned of a technique called crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP), which could be used to determine the targets of an RNA binding protein (RBP). Combined with next generation sequencing, which was pretty new at the time, it was now possible to comprehensively sequence all the targets of a particular RBP. People in the Darnell lab were using this technique to make the first transcriptome-wide binding maps of RBPs involved in splicing in the brain. The big question I settled on was whether I could use this to make an RBP binding map on a viral genome. The first decisions were clearly which RBP and for which virus. I chose Ago2 as the RBP I wanted to study, mainly because the Darnell lab had just reported the first Ago CLIP story in the mouse brain, and since miRNAs and viruses were all the rage, I figured this was a target-rich environment to identify which small RNAs interacted with specific viral messages. The first person I went to was Paul Bieniasz (my third rotation), with the idea to try this on retroviruses. Very quickly I was dissuaded, and with good reason: the retroviral small RNA literature was sort of all over the place, with conflicting reports about which small RNAs were important and how they might regulate viral replication. Paul suggested that I turn to the other big virus lab on campus, headed by Charles Rice.

And so I entered a viral shangri-la. The Rice lab at the time was in the process of transitioning from being a flavi/HCV lab, into a general RNA virology lab. Still there was much to be done with HCV, which had a surprise in that the viral RNA required a cellular miRNA, the liver-specific miR-122, as a necessary host factor (discovered in Peter Sarnow's lab). How did miR-122 binding to the viral message change the normal role for miR-122 in regulating cellular messages? Were there other hot spots for a miRNA on the viral RNA? That was how my thesis project was born: by taking the techniques from one lab and applying them to the problems of another. In my case the goal was to apply next-generation CLIP sequencing methods to study small RNA interactions during hepatitis C virus infection. Later, alongside Troels Scheel, Kathryn Rozen-Gagnon, and others, we expanded this idea to go beyond HCV into many other viruses, and beyond human cells into these viruses' insect vectors. Jointly mentored by both Bob and Charlie, I had a blast tackling these questions, learning from my lab mates, and discovering how a tiny microRNA could be repurposed by a virus for its own survival, and how the host ws impacted.  I received my PhD in 2015, with a commitee consisting of Bob Darnell, Charlie Rice, Luciano Maraffini, Paul Bienaisz (chair), and with Peter Sarnow was my external examiner. I learned an immense amount from this crew who helped me fuse RNA biology with virology in a unique way to drive my scientific path forward.

I stayed in the Rice lab as a postdoc. The decision to stick around in the same institution came down to personal and practical reasons, but the opportunity afforded me a chance to switch gears: if grad school could be defined as being a RNA virologist in an molecular neuroscience lab, the postdoc would be defined by being a cell biologist in a RNA virology lab. I was motivated by a simple frustration - as good as CLIP maps were in yielding where on an RNA a protein was bound, there was surprisingly little to glean as far as which interactions were the most critical for a given phenotype. I reasoned that this could be due to loss of all spatial information: we had no idea where in the cell a given RBP-RNA interaction took place. Combined with the ever-increasing literature pointing to the importance of localized RNA (for translation, for LLPS etc), this was my new target-rich environment, and one that sustains me and the lab still: by finding a way to preserve spatial information for RBP interactions,  we might uncover a whole new layer of regulation. RNA viruses became our perfect model systems - they build distinct replication factories in cells, each with its own spatial organization. Understanding how viral RNAs get to the right place at the right time could teach us fundamental principles about cellular RNA localization.

However, all of this would have to wait as the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic hit. I can't stress how surreal January 2020 was: I was in a  prominent virology lab, in New York City, working on RNA viruses, learning of a mysterious viral pneumonia. We had debates in the lab: Was this our moment to drop everything and pivot and start working on coronaviruses? Or was it a flash in the pan, where we'd all get scooped very quickly and interest would wane? Many a Zika virus project came to mind for the latter.  Reader, a number of us decided to pivot. Thus began the sub-adventure of working on a virus, during that virus's pandemic, in close collaboration with colleagues. Two weekly zoom calls were the norm. Long hours alone at the bench or computer, without the bustling lab, in a ghost town. The isolation was tough, but the teamwork was incredible - we forged bonds over Zoom that made everyone bring their absolute best to the project. No one wanted to let the team down. And we got a lot done: we made some of the first coronavirus reporters (lacking only the spike gene) and performed early genome-wide CRISPR screens with four coronaviruses to uncover essential host factors. A lot of this work is probably most useful for the next pandemic that nature throws at us. A lot of this work is probably most useful for the next pandemic that nature throws at us. And then, in the middle of this surreal year, Charlie won the Nobel Prize in October 2020. There we were, working alone in a mostly empty lab during a pandemic, when our mentor became a Nobel laureate over Zoom. It was a bright spot in a dark time, and somehow perfectly captured the strange mix of isolation and scientific achievement that defined 2020-2021. Looking back, those intense months showed me how basic science can pivot to meet urgent needs, while building foundations for future challenges. 

Through it all, I began looking toward independence. Cleveland drew me in - the RNA Center at CWRU felt like a scientific home. By 2022, I had keys to my own lab space. Now we're mixing computational and experimental approaches to map the geography of viral infections in cells. We're building tools to watch RNA-protein interactions in their native habitats, hoping to find new ways to target viral diseases.

The best part of running a lab? Sharing that original El Paso movie theater wonder with students from all backgrounds. I remember that moment when DNA first captured my imagination - now I get to see that same spark in others. Sometimes it's an undergraduate staring at their first perfect gel, or a rotation student realizing their hypothesis was wrong but finding something more interesting instead. Other times it's watching a PhD student use wet lab intuition to come up with a clever new way to analyze seqeuencing data. In moments like these I'm reminded why I love this job: in doing research, we're creating scientists, each with their own story to tell. Ok, enough of my soapbox, go explore other parts of this site and welcome! 

